UFC champion claims Alex Pereira is retired as he fumes at struggles to defend title

UFC light heavyweight champion Magomed Ankalaev believes Alex Pereira is 'never coming back.'

Ankalaev dethroned Pereira of the belt at UFC 313 in March and is gearing up for his first defence of it.

Ankalaev claimed a unanimous decision win over Pereira at UFC 313 in Las Vegas

The 6ft 3ins Russian claims that he agreed to fight Pereira in June, July and August after reports suggested that both men had agreed to a rematch.

However, on Sunday, Ankalaev revealed that he has now seemingly moved on from the prospective fight after negotiations.

"Alex [is] done," he wrote on social media. "He [is] never coming back. Let’s move on - June, July, August, I said yes."

Ankalaev spent the majority of last month posting various messages regarding his rematch with Pereira.

The champion insists he is ready to defend his title any date, with Pereira likely needing more time to prepare for their inevitable second meeting.

Pereira is one of the biggest stars in the UFC right now having finished 2024 with three knockouts across three main events on pay-per-view cards.

Ankalaev's words come just a few weeks after the Brazilian fan-favourite claimed he was 'hacked' on X after a post suggested he had threatened UFC CEO Dana White with retirement.

"I don't even know what's going on. I have a great relationship with the UFC," he said.

Former UFC champion Daniel Cormier, who shares a good relationship with 'Poatan', wasn't buying his response.

"Pereira is a liar," Cormier said. "Pereira did not get hacked yesterday.

"Pereira might have tweeted something and then somebody called him and was like, 'Yo, calm down. Let’s chill.'

"I don’t believe the hack thing, bro. It’s too convenient. It was very unusual. It was too specific. He didn’t use profanity. It kind of sounded like Pereira."

Pereira had posted: "I always answered the UFC’s calls. But if they want to play with me, we can do that.

"I’ve never spoken poorly of the UFC but with what I’ve just heard I’m disheartened.

"I’ve already had thoughts of not fighting anymore, and after what was just relayed to me this may be the start."

Pereira was largely outclassed in the main event of UFC 313 in March as struggled to fight his own game and match Ankalaev's expertise in the clinch.

He suffered a unanimous decision defeat on the Las Vegas card, but it seemed both men were destined to rematch due to their instant reactions after the fight.

However, no progress has been made yet and it seems like Ankalaev is clearly frustrated,

"Alex Pereira don’t want the Ank anymore," he said last month.

"Let’s leave him alone because I’m not a bully: Fake ninja he said he has to go back to school because he cannot read.

"Dana White, Mick Maynard, give me some fish."

This came a few days after he wrote: "Guys, is there anyone in the light heavyweight division who’s willing to fight me?

"Because Jiri [Prochazka] and Alex do not want to fight."

Ankalaev may have wanted to fight former champion Prochazka while he waits for Pereira to be fully fit again, but Prochazka is currently completing a security degree and wants it finished before he returns to action.

Pereira has remained quiet online since his hacking scandal, but it wouldn't be a surprise if the UFC announced his next steps soon, due to Ankalaev's growing frustration.